Nested Triggers proposal (#345)
tektoncd/community: teps/0052-nested-triggers.md

---
status: proposed
title: Nested Triggers
creation-date: '2021-02-10'
last-updated: '2021-02-10'
authors:
- '@jmcshane'
---

# TEP-0052: Nested Triggers

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
  - [Use Cases (optional)](#use-cases-optional)
- [Requirements](#requirements)

> - [Proposal](#proposal)

Reviewer: I see `Implementation Notes` and `Example` are part of `Proposal` so can you add those sections here

* Users should be able to exclude a set of triggers from event listener HTTP request processing

## Proposal

This document has been opened to begin a discussion around the feature. There is a draft implementation
in [triggers](https://github.com/tektoncd/triggers/pull/946). Our team from Optum is also willing
to come demo the capabilities of this feature in a broader working group meeting, if desired.

### Implementation Notes

The current implementation provides the following set of API changes:

* New `triggers` filed would be optional within `TriggerSpec` and accept any unicode character.
* New `triggers` field would be optional within `EventListenerSpec` and accept any unicode character.
* Update validation on these two objects to allow for `TriggerTemplate` to be unset

One of the key challenges here is that if the logic for a downstream trigger is simplified, then this
downstream trigger must be excluded from processing in the default HTTP endpoint. One of the goals
outlined above is that Trigger authors are enabled to focus on the logic specific to their trigger.
If an interceptor chain is removed from the processing of an authored trigger then it cannot be

> exposed for direct requests otherwise requests could bypass the desired filtering.

Reviewer 2: Haven't fully thought through this, but an idea I'm thinking about is modeling this as an authorization problem and using that as a mechanism for determining whether an entity can expose / invoke a given trigger.

I haven't fully thought through the identities at play here (e.g. is it only the EL, or do triggers have their own identity?), but I think this might help model some of the more complex cases of multiple ELs referencing the same trigger.

> exposed for direct requests otherwise requests could bypass the desired filtering.

Author: @wlynch I do like the idea of having the event listener specify a trigger selector. right now, the only option is a namespace selector and then it queries all triggers. given the current implementation around querying triggers, this would be a very simple extension that would enable event listener operators to specify the triggers that should be processed.

> exposed for direct requests otherwise requests could bypass the desired filtering.

Reviewer 3: This is a very interesting discussion, we can probably merge this one as it is now, and continue the discussion on this on the next PR?

> #### Example

Reviewer: :tada: :+1:

```yaml
#nested-trigger-1
apiVersion: triggers.tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Trigger
metadata:
  name: nested-trigger-1
  labels:
    #trigger is not available for external processing
    tekton.dev/sink: hidden
spec:
  interceptors:
  - cel:
      filter: >-
        extensions.example-webhook == "filtered-value-1"
  bindings:
  - ref: nested-binding-1
  - ref: nested-binding-2
  template:
    ref: nested-triggertemplate-1
```

```yaml
#nested-trigger-2
apiVersion: triggers.tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Trigger
metadata:
  name: nested-trigger-2
  labels:
    #trigger is not available for external processing
    tekton.dev/sink: hidden
spec:
  interceptors:
  - cel:
      filter: >-
        extensions.example-webhook == "filtered-value-2"
  triggers:
  #note: not shown here
  - ref: nested-trigger-3
  bindings:
  - ref: nested-binding-3
  - ref: nested-binding-4
  template:
    ref: nested-triggertemplate-2
```

Notice how simple it is for the Trigger author to write the logic around their trigger
when the common logic is implemented at the top level. Trigger authors can also manage
their own set of downstream triggers as you can specify additional triggers alongside

> a binding and template once the interceptor chain completes.

Reviewer: seeing these points i am thinking like it would be great if you add `Advantages` section and add these points over there

WDYT?

Reviewer 4: I think it's probably fine to merge this as is as proposed and then come back and add in some alternatives and flesh out the design.

objects. As a simple example, if shared volumes are desired for a set of tasks or pipelines, 
today this would need to be done by passing the same data in the incoming event. 
When processing is centralized, extensions can be set in the interceptor chain and 
then used by all the downstream resources in processing.

The result of centralizing this processing and passing common data down to downstream pipelines
is a simpler experience for Triggers authors. It reduces the YAML burden of copying and maintaining
the same interceptor chain across multiple triggers, it eases the barrier of entry for writing
new triggers within the system, and it reduces noise in event listeners logs which is helpful
for debugging issues.

This solution is in line with multiple issues created by Tekton maintainers. We want to solve
a broad set of use cases by allowing a complex graph of filters and invocations to be invoked
by a single triggering event.

* [tektoncd/triggers#820](https://github.com/tektoncd/triggers/issues/820)
* [tektoncd/triggers#367](https://github.com/tektoncd/triggers/issues/367)
* [tektoncd/triggers#44](https://github.com/tektoncd/triggers/issues/44)

### Goals

> * Add a way for `EventListener` triggers and `Triggers` themselves to specify additional triggers

Reviewer 4: I'd reframe the Goals section more in terms of the problem than the solution. So something like:  `Allow some shared logic to be processed before Triggers are called`

  to process after interceptor logic concludes.

> * Provide a way to exclude some `Triggers` from processing by the `EventListener` HTTP handler

Reviewer 4: is this an explicit goal or more of a consequence of the current nested triggers solution.

Author: This is an explicit goal for a couple use cases. It really refers to what you said in the PR review comment: https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/345#pullrequestreview-589764864. If we are separating this logic between trigger authors and operators, then exposing all Triggers on the sink would be problematic

Reviewer 4: Ok, so we need two kinds of "triggers" an operator level kind and a regular user kind.

> * Pass data from interceptor chain processing down to the invoked `Triggers`. This is in line with

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Pass the same data from an interceptor chain processing down to multiple `Triggers`. This is in line with
```

  recent discussions around only allowing modifications to extensions, rather than the current format
  where webhook extensions can modify the body and headers of the incoming event.

### Non-Goals

* While we posit that performance improvements are possible by limiting the number of invoked triggers,
  significant performance gains is not intended to be a goal of this proposal.

### Use Cases (optional)

* Add common metadata to every github event based on external contextual information
* Filter events that don't pass validation in a single Trigger to reduce noise and ease debugging

> * Generate a single PVC name for a set of pipelines to use based on event context and pass PVC 

Reviewer 4: I think the PVC one is a great use case that should also help with the Tekton dogfooding efforts.

  into each pipelinerun as a workspace
* Simplify the maintenance around branching logic in triggering. For example, if the logic for two

>   Triggers is similar, but dependent on a single parameter, those two pipelines can have the same

Reviewer 4: v minor: this feels more like a Goal than a use case :)

  filter set defined in the upstream Trigger. Then, the two pipelines filters only need to specify
  the differentiating logic.

## Requirements

> * New `triggers` filed would be optional within `TriggerSpec` and accept any unicode character.

Reviewer 4: I have the same comment as the Goals section. This should be more oriented towards the problem than the current solution e.g. 
1. Users should be able to reuse a single chain of interceptors across multiple triggers.

(I do get that this is a bit redundant with the Goals section so IMO its fine to skip this section at the moment and just the use Requirements section,)
